Now, activity types are one important feature
that helps you control when exactly a workflow executes.
Another important feature are event filters.
So what are event filters?
Well, let's say that we also wanna listen to the push event.
By default, out of the box, this would mean
that whenever a commit is pushed
to any branch, this workflow would be triggered.
Now, especially for a workflow that deploys code
and therefore, updates the website
that's visible to your users
should probably not run for all pushes against all branches.
Instead, it would be reasonable to assume
that only pushes to the main branch
should trigger this workflow.
And that's exactly what you can control
with event filters.
Now, you can also learn more about event filters
in the official documentation under workflow syntax,
and here you'll learn that for a short list
of selected events, there are filters that can be added.
To be precise, GitHub Actions currently supports filters
for pull_request, pull_request_target,
push, and also workflow _call,
which is something I'll get back to later.
Now, for push, we can, for example,
add the branches filter here
or the tags or branches-ignore or tags-ignore filters.
This allows you to only start a workflow
if a push targets a specific branch
or does not target a specific branch
if you wanna check for the opposite
or has a specific tag attached to it so to say.
So if you, for example, only want to run this workflow,
if a push target's the main branch,
you would add the branches filter under the push event,
and this name also is reserved
because it has to be branches as you see here
in the official docs.
So you add this branches filter
and then you specify your list of branches
that should be covered.
For example, the main branch.
This configuration would make sure
that only pushes to the main branch
would trigger this workflow.
And of course, you can add multiple branches here
and you can even use a more flexible notation
and for example, write something like this,
which would mean all branches that start with dev-
and then any other word or combination of characters
of your choice would be covered.
Or something like this,
which means all branches that start with feat/
and having a slash in a branch name is totally fine,
and then any other words or combination of characters
including more slashes thereafter.
That's the difference between one asterisk
and double asterisk.
The double asterisk allows for further slashes
as part of the remaining characters.
The single asterisk means any characters other than slashes.
So this would cover pushes to dev-new
or dev-this-is-new
and this would cover pushes to feat/new
or feat/new/button or anything like this.
And this here would only cover main.
So now pushes to any branch with a name like this
would trigger a workflow.
Pushes to a branch like developer-1
would not trigger this workflow
because this would not be covered
by any of these definitions.
So that's the branches filter.
And this branches filter can also be added
to pull_request, also in addition to the types here.
So you can narrow this down even further.
You could for example, say that this workflow
should run if a push to one of these branches happens
or if a pull request is opened
and targets one of these branches.
You can also add the branches filter here to pull_request
as you also see in the official documentation.
There under pull_request,
you also see that branches can be added here.
And if you know that you wanna run a workflow
for all branches but one specific branch,
or a list of specific branches,
you could use branches-ignore.
Also for the push event.
Now, event filters are therefore useful
and you're not limited to filtering based on branches.
You can also filter based on file paths
with the paths filter.
This is another filter that can be added
to pull requests and pushes,
as you see in the official docs again.
So for push and pull_request,
you can add the paths and the paths-ignore filters.
And this allows you to basically say
that you want to run a workflow
if a push or a pull_request changes files
in a specific path
or with paths-ignore if it changes anything
but files in a specific folder.
And at the bottom of this page,
you also find cheat sheets
with all the syntax, rules and combinations you can use
for specifying your branches
and for specifying your file paths.
But here, for example, we could say
that we want to run this workflow
when we push to the main branch.
But maybe only if we did not change a file
in this github/workflows folder.
This could be done by adding github/workflows/*
as a paths-ignore value here
and this means that this event here,
this push event activates this workflow
if we target one of these branches
but we did not change a file
in the workflows folder in the GitHub folder.
And even if we also changed other files,
as long as at least one file
in this folder changed,
this workflow will not be triggered
because we used paths-ignore here.
If we use just paths here,
it would mean the opposite.
Now this workflow would only be triggered
if at least one file changed in this workflows folder
and we targeted one of these branches.
So that's how you can control in detail
when this workflow will be triggered.
And therefore now if I create a new commit here,
and I say changed workflow,
and I push this,
the workflow should actually not execute
because I changed a file in the workflows folder.
I changed the definition of this workflow.
So therefore now if I push this here,
and we take a look at actions,
we see that no new workflow run was started
because for the reasons I just explained.